Chelsy Alfaro 
Jenny Chen 
Niloufar Nasrollahzadeh 
Eduardo Ramirez 
Danielle Rucker 
Samantha Stackelhouse
Haley Welch 
PBPL280 
06/11/2021


**Neighborhood Change and High School Dropout**


**Introduction:**
The average dropout rate in 2019 and 2020 is equal to about 8.95%, which is around 44,072 students who are unable to graduate high school. The purpose of this research project is to analyze how differing neighborhood characteristics such as median household income and ethnic demographics can impact student success. According to research studies conducted in the U.S., neighborhood attributes are known to impact developing students’ behaviors. This is an important topic to highlight because educational attainment is often correlated with economic success in the future (Crowder & South, 2011). Studies have indicated that lower income neighborhoods encounter a lack of institutional resources, negative peer influences such as drugs and alcohol, violence, environmental and health issues, and stigmatization of their circumstances, which puts youth at a disadvantage to no fault of their own (Galster et. al, 2016). These factors are likely to cause behavioral and cognitive changes in developing youth that can completely alter one’s future success. 
Another study investigated the impacts of exposure to poor communities for longer periods of time on high school graduation rates and followed 4,154 children, from the ages of 1-17, in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, monitoring local neighborhoods annually. Not only do they find that sustained exposure to poor communities has a significant impact on high school graduation, but also find that growing up in the most impoverished quintile of communities reduces the likelihood of graduating for black children from 96 to 76 percent, and for nonblack children from 95 to 87 percent (Wodtke, Harding, et. al, 16).  Additionally, other studies have found consistent results with past literature that there is a “very strong correlation between the socioeconomic status of the immediate neighborhood measured at a single point in time (here, age 14) and the average neighborhood socioeconomic status experienced during the entire childhood life course (ages 0 to 18)” (Crowder, South, 20).  It is important that studies recognize that there is a direct relationship between student success, in terms of graduating high school and having a low absentee rate, and socioeconomic factors.
To further investigate this issue, a geospatial analysis was performed on all 58 California counties to measure how neighborhood variable, specifically sex, age, and income, have an effect on effects on school district variables, specifically dropout rates, absenteeism rates, and graduation rates.  Income and ethnic demographics are known to be strong indicators of neighborhood socioeconomic statuses. Additionally, knowing that there are significant inequalities in the k-12 education system, we want to have a better understanding of what factors are contributing to this issue through looking at neighborhood changes and their effects on school performance. Do high school graduation rates vary based on neighborhood demographics across California?

**School Data:**
To better understand the relationship between neighborhood change and school change. Data was obtained, cleaned and geospatially analyzed using two data sets from The California Department of Education. The first dataset gave insight into the graduation rates at each high school throughout all fifty-eight California counties. The second dataset focused on absenteeism counts and different rates, such as dropout rates at each school throughout the state. Both datasets contained data for all schools in all counties across California from 2019 to 2020. Three variables were chosen to help support our analysis: chronic absenteeism rates, high school graduation rates and high school dropout rates.
The dataset with the school rates and counts was read into Python directly from the internet as a .txt file and then stored locally as a .csv file to avoid delays when running the subsequent code. The charter schools were removed from the dataset due to potential inconsistencies between the two datasets obtained for the analysis. In order to ensure the analysis was conducted at the county level the rates and counts were aggregated to the county level, meaning the values for all the districts in one county were summed. Some of the values were missing for the dataset that was read in and had been replaced by asterisks, therefore a code was run to drop these values and replace them with “NaN.” Additionally, the columns were cleaned to ensure that the variables chosen for the analysis were all “float64” and not “object,” which permitted for them to be summed and visualized appropriately. These same steps were followed to clean the second dataset obtained from The California Department of Education and the two datasets were then merged. 
Following the creation of the new combined dataframe, the geometries for each county were imported from geosnap. The polygons were merged with the dataframe and selected only for where the state column was equal to California. This was done to eliminate other county’s outside of California that had the same name and avoid errors in the data. To summarize the data visualizations were created using quantiles and plotting each variable individually, by county. 
**Neighborhood Data:**
The American Community Survey 5-year estimates 2018-2014 comes from the U.S. Census Bureau, which provides the variables median household income, age and sex of census tract residents,  and at the geographic level unit of analysis for California census tracts. Selection of the variable median household income at the tract level supplies data about the socioeconomic status of neighborhoods and their conditions. Tracts within neighborhoods can be classified as either above the median for high income tracts or below the median for low income households. Prior to the transition into adulthood, young teenagers and adults enter highschool within their local neighborhoods, with the goal to successfully graduate and obtain their credentials of a high school diploma. Literature on the relationship between neighborhood effects and school achievement have shown that disadvantaged neighborhoods are associated with negative educational outcomes such as lower school achievement and higher dropout rates (Rendon, 2014).. Students that attend high school who live in disadvantaged neighborhoods with lower socioeconomic status and median household income are more at risk to experience the negative outcomes in educational achievement. As a result, the neighborhood variable median household income is used to identify the neighborhood conditions of tracts based on their median household income. Aggregating all the tracts within California’s 58 counties allows our research to make a comparison between similar or dissimilar counties median household income levels. 
	The age and sex variable for the residents of census tracts is important to analyze the rates of male and female populations within counties. The dataset provided information on total populations of males and females across several age groups, beginning with less than 5 years old up to 85 and over. It also broke down the data by racial and ethnic backgrounds. We were able to use the total number of male and female populations that are just before or still in high school. We were also able to isolate Asian, Black, White, and Latino student populations to see the differences amongst the various groups. Using this information allows us to then view the relationship between graduation and dropout rates in relation to the changes in high school aged students.This can be significant when comparing high dropout rates to low populations of high school students, for example.
**Results:**
Our study consisted of two types of analysis: spatial and visual statistical analysis. After conducting a spatial map analysis of our GeoSnap neighborhood data, specifically sex, age, race, and income variables, and California county school districts data, specifically drop out, graduation, and absenteeism rates. We included two measures for income: median household income--or income below 50% and above 50% of all households within an area--as well as per capita income, the average income of an area spread amongst all residents including children.
Since our neighborhoods and schools data were aggregated down to the county level and have our geometries as polygons, we were able to use these variables to show their spatial distributions in comparison to median household income across california. Overall, we created 13 spatial maps: 3 maps for the income variable, 4 maps for the race variable, and the rest are school variable maps. In addition, we used median household income, dropout rates, and graduation rates for each county to create bar graphs and dual bar graphs
	After analyzing our bar graph visualizations, we concluded the California counties that presented the highest median household income include Los Angeles, San Diego, Orange, Santa Clara, Alameda, and Riverside county. The highest dropout rates were prevalent in Mono, San Benito, Inyo, Nevada, and Fresno county. In addition, the highest graduation rates belonged to Sierra, Mariposa, Colusa, Claveras, and Humboldt. Evidently, although it is expected for higher income counties to have the highest graduation rates, or evidence shows that this was not the case. In fact, counties with the highest graduation rates belong to the lower per capita income.

With the results of our spatial map visualizations, we are able to identify several trends. The first being the relationship between higher median household incomes and lower absentee rates within California counties. This correlation may be attributed to a greater emphasis on academic resources and investments within the county. Furthermore, we noticed that counties with a lower median household income have a higher rate of middle-high school aged (10-19) children in comparison to wealthier counties. Whilst examining the trends per capita income, we found that the counties with the highest graduation rates, Humboldt, Sierra, and Colusa county, reported lower per capita incomes in comparison to counties with less academic success. Due to the fact that per capita income includes children in its demographic, this measure of income may not be completely representative of the wealth of each county.  Overall, the results of our bar graph and spatial map visualizations are consistent with each other.
What our results outline is a clear definition of potential educational success for students. This success is dependent on circumstances outside of a student's control, i.e. school location, income, race, or age. The results identify the issue of equity, not only in our educational system but in our community as a whole. A student's potential to graduate and future economic success should not be dictated by an uncontrollable variable like location. However, this is the reality and it is a reality that is affecting our most vulnerable student populations. It is important to take these results into consideration when determining future influential local, state, and federal policies on school and community funding. Without the proper support in place for students facing these issues we will not be able to offer them an equitable or valuable education.
**Discussion:**
	Our research project utilizes data at different geographic unit levels that is aggregated to the county level for California. The original geographic level for our neighborhood variables were at the Census Tract level and was aggregated up to the county level to match our school level variables. In the end, we made a comparison between different counties based on their median household income, racial demographics, school aged children from 10-19 years old, dropout, and absentee rates. Given the time constraints of our project, improvements can be made for future research to study the effects of neighborhood characteristics that can influence student success at the high school level. 
One avenue that should be considered that is discussed in the literature is to look into additional neighborhood variables that can provide data on the amount of institutional resources within a community and reported violence rates. The spatial context of children’s and young adult’s neighborhoods influences their behaviors, which can affect their overall behavior and success towards educational outcomes. In addition, counties with lower median household income had higher counts of school aged children should be examined closer because resources may be limited in the county. Limited institutional resources such as quantity of schools can overcrowd students into over capacity filled schools can also have negative effects on student dropout and absentee rates. 
While the trends of neighborhood demographics varied amongst counties and variables it is important to note that there was still a quantitative relationship shown between a student's neighborhood and their educational success. This speaks to a larger issue of equity within the countries education system, one that is based on factors like race, sex, age, income, and location. It is a relationship that has the potential to impact students in a way that can severely impact their educational and future aspirations and successes.
**Conclusion:**

Our research provides conclusive evidence that most neighborhoods with a lower socioeconomic status are correlated with lower high school graduation rates and a higher frequency of absentee rates within California counties with the exception of a few counties. The findings of this study are fairly consistent with prior research that identifies an association between the variables, income and race, and a lower educational performance. (Vartanian & Gleason, 1999). Due to the fact that educational attainment is an significant indicator of future success, the differences between socioeconomic status in California counties should not be what makes or breaks one's access to a quality education and developmental opportunities. Perhaps public policy can be endorsed to provide equitable solutions and resources for marginalized neighborhoods. Educators suggest creating policies to reduce harmful disparities for the students who are not quite on track to graduate high school. Advantageous recommendations include: 1.  investing in programming to strategize  plans that will improve the methods and resources of lower performing schools and 2. Creating personalized/specific graduation plans for students to track their progress (Messacar & Oreopoulos, 2012). With these policies in place, racially diverse students from low income communities may have greater success in academic achievement and their future aspirations.



**Works Cited**

 Crowder, K., South, J. “Spatial and temporal dimensions of neighborhood effects on high school 
graduation” Social Science Research, Volume 40, Issue 1, 2011, Pages 87-106, ISSN 
0049-089X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2010.04.013.

Galster, G., Santiago, A., Stack, L., and Cutsinger, J. “Neighborhood effects on secondary school 
performance of Latino and African American youth: Evidence from a natural experiment 
in Denver.” Journal of Urban Economics, Volume 93, 2016, Pages 30-48, ISSN 0094-1190, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2016.02.004.

Messacar, D. and Oreopoulos, P. “Staying in School: A Proposal to Raise High School 
Graduation Rates”. Brookings: The Hamilton Project, Sept. 2012. 	https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/THP_MessacarOreopoulos_CompSchool_DiscPaper.pdf

Rendón, Maria G. "Drop out and “disconnected” young adults: Examining the impact of 
neighborhood and school contexts." The Urban Review 46.2 (2014): 169-196.

Vartanian, T and Gleason, P. “Do neighborhood conditions affect high school dropout and 
college graduation rates?,” The Journal of Socio-Economics, Volume 28, Issue 1,1999, 
Pages 21-41, ISSN 1053-5357, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-5357(99)00011-6.
Wodtke, Geoffrey T., David J. Harding, and Felix Elwert. "Neighborhood effects in temporal 
perspective: The impact of long-term exposure to concentrated disadvantage on high 
school graduation." American sociological review 76.5 (2011): 713-736.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0094119016000127
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0049089X10000840
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/THP_MessacarOreopoulos_CompSchool_DiscPaper.pdf
https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S1053535799000116?token=700E22BF28D015EE67F216B50E498C889E30CAB77297BDA5FA80F3A9FD6F348F2515D985E64852F1FB96C72DC11B944E&originRegion=us-east-1&originCreation=20210609232320

